Firstly, it's helpful to re-establish the connection between your mind
and body even if you are not dissociated all the time.

Great way to do this is body-scan meditations. Look for sensation,
tingling, pressure, heat, or cold. Mentally describe the sensations
you are feeling as you feel them.

Now that you're in contact with the physical sensations in your body,
you can continue meditating and start trying to observe your own
thoughts and seeing how they come and go.  Often you'll get lost in
thought, and if and when you do, try and notice what you feel in your
body about that thought.

Give yourself plenty of space and time for these to come.  When I
first started doing this work, most of the time I would look into my
body and just feel... nothing. And because I felt like I was supposed
to be feeling something, sometimes I would make something up.  This is
not a good idea, so please, avoid my mistakes. Instead, just go back
to doing body-scans and trying to notice the physical sensations that
are the most obvious, the sensation of your back against the chair,
your hands resting on your thighs or clasped together, whatever is
there.


Outline:

## How to Recognize Dissociation

## Self Check-In Habit

## Body Scan

## Visual Scan

## EMDR

## Walking


Intro:

These are just tools, try them out for a bit, see what works for you
and your life, and if something doesn't feel like it's doing anything
for you, stop doing it.

I fully believe that you can learn to re-engage with your body by
yourself, but I will tell you upfront that I think one incredibly
helpful thing early on was having my therapist notice when I was
starting to dissociate and ask me about it. This helped me develop the
habit of checking in with myself periodically to ask "Am I dissociated
right now?"
