# Grounding Your Self


## Intro

These may sound silly and far too simple, but I promise, these
techniques did actually work for me.  One of the most important things
about this is that you need to give yourself time. Try not to expect
that doing these exercises once will "cure" you of dissociation,
because frankly it won't.


__THERE ARE NO SILVER BULLETS.__

It sounds like you experience a pretty profound and continuous state
of dissociation and that it's been going on for a long time.  Patterns
like that don't just change overnight. It will take time, patience and
persistence to make these kinds of changes. The more support you can
get from other people, whether it's friends or family, a support
group, or a therapist, having people to support is going to be
critical. It seems pretty likely that if you are in a constant or
semi-constant state of dissociation there are probably a __LOT__ of
repressed emotions hiding underneath it, and one of the things that
will start happening as you start to reintegrate is that those
emotions will start to come out, whether you want them to or not. So
try to be prepared. And also, take it slow.


## Coming Back

### What's the Difference

First you need to learn to identify when you are feeling dissociated
and what it feels like to _not_ be dissociated.  Dissociation can
often manifests as people feeling like they are floating above or
outside their body rather than inhabiting it, or a feeling of
floatiness, or oven mild dizziness. I also will often notice that I
cannot easily access the physical sensations that are happening in my
body while I'm dissociated.

Learning to recognize _when_ you are dissociated is probably going to
be more challenging without someone to interact with about it because
the very nature of being in a dissociated state means you are unlikely
to notice it.  To counteract this, it's useful to try and develop a
habit of periodically throughout the day checking in with yourself and
asking "How am I feeling right now? Do I feel dissociated?" Then check
for the specific physical sensations (or lack thereof) that you will
begin to associate with feeling dissociated.

If you have a good friend who's help you feel comfortable enlisting in
this project, maybe have them read this, and tell them what you're
struggling with and ask them to try and notice if your behavior
changes suddenly and dramatically.

Personally, I've found that most of my friends were aware of _when_ I
was going into dissociative states, just not what they were. For me
particularly, I tend to dissociate in emotionally charged situations,
particularly intense conversations. And when I do dissociate in these
situations I go from being tactfully truthfully, to brutally honest in
a way that can be quite hurtful.  And I'm capable of being hurtful in
this way precisely because I have dissociated from my own feelings.


### Body Scan

The flip side of recognizing dissociation is to be able to recognize
what it feels like to be fully integrated. One of the best techniques
that I know for this is to do a body-scan meditation.  A body-scan
meditation is essentially just simply paying attention to the
sensations you are feeling in every part of your body, one at a time.

Focusing your attention on just the physical sensations in a specific
part of your body, and then "scanning" that level of attention across
your entire body.

I highly recommend the 'body scan' and 'body scan for preparing for
sleep' guided meditation on the [UCLA Mindful Awareness Research
Center's site](https://www.uclahealth.org/marc/mindful-meditations).


### Summary

Basically, learning to recognize when you are dissociated or
integrated is about learning more about yourself and how _you_
function. Try not to be judgmental or cruel to yourself while
exploring how you function.  Instead, try to cultivate simple
curiosity, and a process of discovery.


## Maintenance


### Side-to-side Scan

Turn your head as far as it is comfortable for you to the left, and
then slowly (at about 5 degree per second turn) slowly focus your eyes
on specific objects you can see in your visual field.  I also find it
helpful to mentally name each object I focus on.  Make sure to
continue breathing while doing this scan. Continue this scan until
your head has turned as far as it is comfortable for you to turn to
the right. Keep doing this until you feel more grounded, less
dissociated, calmer, less anxious or whatever caused you do the scan
in the first place.


### Getting a Different Perspective


### Socializing


### Walking/Exercise


### Meditation

First off, meditation can be extremely helpful.  There are many, many
meditation apps on various phone platforms, and there are free
resources available online. If you don't have experience with
meditation, guided meditations are a good place to start.  Here are a
few resources I've used:

-
- [The Waking Up app](https://wakingup.com/)
- [10% Happier](https://www.tenpercent.com/)

Also, there are many YouTube channels that have guided meditations and
"auto-hypnosis" videos, but the quality tends to vary _widely_.

The UCLA meditations are simple and basic, but helpful. I used those
for a long time before moving on to other things. The Waking Up app
and 10% Happier are both good apps for providing a progression of
meditation lessons to actually teach you how to meditate and more of
the full range of what you can use it for and the many different ways
there are to practice it.  Also, most of the content in the Waking Up
app is behind a pay-wall, but if you truly cannot afford it you can
get free access to the subscription for a year by writing an email to
the developers of the app (info about how that works is
[here](https://help.wakingup.com/article/54-how-much-does-the-waking-up-course-cost)
).

You do have to practice it though.  Even practicing meditation for
just ten minutes a day can be extremely impactful, so don't think it
has to be a gigantic commitment of time.
